Add userguide chapter on building Gradle projects with GitHub Actions (#20233)
gradle/gradle: subprojects/docs/src/docs/userguide/reference/ci-systems/github-actions.adoc

[[build_github_actions]]
= Executing Gradle builds on GitHub Actions

TIP: Top engineering teams using GitHub Actions have been able to reduce CI build time by up to 90% by using the Gradle Build Cache. https://gradle.com/training/build-cache-deep-dive/?bid=guides-execute-travisci[Register here] for our Build Cache training session to learn how your team can achieve similar results.

Building Gradle projects doesn't stop with the developer's machine.
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Continuous_integration[Continuous Integration] (CI) has been a long-established practice for running a build for every single change committed to version control to tighten the feedback loop.

In this guide, we'll discuss how to configure link:https://github.com/features/actions/[GitHub Actions] for a typical Gradle project.

== What you'll need

* A text editor
* A command prompt
* The Java Development Kit (JDK), version 1.8 or higher

> * A https://gradle.org/install[Gradle distribution], version {gradle-version} or better

Reviewer: `{gradle-version}` is not expanded. It must be replaced with `{gradleVersion}`. It would be great to fix that in the other CI guides.

Author: Fixed in all guides

[listing.terminal.sample-command]
----
$ ./gradlew build

BUILD SUCCESSFUL
14 actionable tasks: 14 executed
----

The project provides the <<gradle_wrapper.adoc#gradle_wrapper,Gradle Wrapper>> as part of the repository.
It is a recommended practice for any Gradle project as it enables your project to built on CI without having to install the Gradle runtime.

=== Build scan integration

The sample project is equipped with support for generating link:https://scans.gradle.com/[build scans].
Running the build with the command line option `--scan` renders a link in the console.

[listing.terminal.sample-command]
----
$ ./gradlew build --scan
Publishing build scan...
https://gradle.com/s/7mtynxxmesdio
----

The following section will describe how to build the project with the help of GitHub Actions.

== Configure GitHub Actions

GitHub Actions is a free, cloud-based CI solution provider built directly into GitHub making it an excellent choice for open source projects hosted on GitHub.

> You can build any project as long as it is hosted on GitHub as public repository.

Author: I removed this requirement (private repo is OK), but fixed the same content in `travis-ci.adoc`.

GitHub Actions can be configured to make your build outputs and test results available for download.

=== Configure the GitHub Actions workflow

You create a GitHub Actions workflow by adding a `.github/workflows/<workflow-name>.yml` file to your repository.
This workflow definition file contains all relevant instructions for building the project on GitHub Actions.

> The following workflow file instructs GitHub Actions to build your Gradle project with the default JDK, using th Java project with JDK 8, using the Gradle Wrapper to run the build.

Reviewer 2: :exclamation: - The double "using" throws me off, I wouldn't repeat it.

```suggestion
The following workflow file instructs GitHub Actions to build your Gradle project using the Gradle Wrapper and executed by the default Java distribution -- currently JDK 1.8.
```

Reviewer 2: :grey_question: - Shouldn't we rather promote JDK 11 instead of JDK 8, as it's EOL?
The action's repository also has 11 as the example version.

Reviewer 2: :x: - at minimum, this typo should be fixed
```suggestion
The following workflow file instructs GitHub Actions to build your Gradle project with the default JDK, using the Java project with JDK 8, using the Gradle Wrapper to run the build.
```

Author: I improved the wording and removed any reference to the exact JDK used (it's not important to the tutorial).

Building Gradle projects doesn't stop with the developer's machine.
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Continuous_integration[Continuous Integration] (CI) has been a long-established practice for running a build for every single change committed to version control to tighten the feedback loop.

In this guide, we'll discuss how to configure link:https://github.com/features/actions/[GitHub Actions] for a Gradle project hosted on GitHub.

== Introduction

GitHub Actions is a free, cloud-based CI solution provider built directly into GitHub making it an excellent choice for open source projects hosted on GitHub.
You can build any project as long as it is hosted on GitHub.
GitHub Actions can be configured to make your build outputs and test results available for download.

== What you'll need

* A text editor
* A command prompt
* The Java Development Kit (JDK), version 1.8 or higher
* A local Gradle installation, to initialize a new Gradle project
* A GitHub account

== Setup a Gradle project on GitHub

> If you have an existing Gradle project hosted on GitHub, then you can skip this step and move directly to <<configure-github-actions,the next section>>.

Reviewer: That internal reference to `configure-github-actions` is broken. In order for it to not break our automated check, the section must have an explicite ID, like `[[configure-github-actions]]` on top of the title it represents.

If not, follow these step to initialize a new Gradle project on GitHub.

=== Create a new GitHub repository for your project

Via the GitHub user interface, create a new repository named `github-actions-gradle-sample`.

image::ci-systems/github-actions-create-repository.png[Create new GitHub repository]

=== Clone the repository locally

[listing.terminal.sample-command]
----
$ git clone git@github.com:<YOUR-GITHUB-USER>/github-actions-gradle-sample.git
Cloning into 'github-actions-gradle-sample'...
$ cd github-actions-gradle-sample
----

=== Initialize the Gradle project and commit to the repository

Use `gradle init` to create a fresh Gradle project. You can choose any of the available options during `init`, but we recommend choosing "library" as the project type.

Once the project is generated, commit the changes and push to the repository.

[listing.terminal.sample-command]
----
$ gradle init
$ git add .
$ git commit -m "Initial commit"
$ git push
----

=== Enable Build Scan publishing

> <<https://scans.gradle.com/,Gradle Build Scans>> are a great way to view your build results, and provide valuable insights into your build.

Reviewer: For external links, use the `link[text]` notation, otherwise this triggers the internal link checker and it fails.
